Test strategy to UTO performance tuning (#1)
see-quick/verification: testing/performance_testing/uto/TestStrategy.md

- **Scope**: Define the boundaries of testing, including targeted use cases and metrics.

## 2. Test Objectives
- Evaluate the performance and scalability of UTO.
- Compare UTO performance with the BTO (if applicable).
- Identify optimal configuration settings for different use cases.
## 3. Test Items
- Unidirectional Topic Operator (UTO) in Kafka environments.
- Comparison with the Basic Topic Operator (BTO) (optional).
## 4. Test Criteria
- Success Criteria: Define what constitutes a successful test (e.g., meeting targeted throughput and latency metrics).
- Exit Criteria: Specify conditions for concluding the testing phase (e.g., all scenarios tested, no critical bugs remaining).
## 5. Test Approach
- Use Case Scenarios:
    * Alice’s Bulk Ingestion/Batch Use Case
    * Bob’s Data Streaming Use Case
    * Carol’s Development Cluster Use Case
- **Performance Metrics (important):**
    * **Throughput**: Number of KafkaTopic events processed per unit of time.
    * **Latency**: Time from KafkaTopic event receipt to processing completion.
    * **Resource** Utilization: CPU, Memory, and I/O monitoring.
    * **Error** Rates: Tracking errors and resource conflicts.

>     * TODO: add some one? (e.g., time to reconcile)

Reviewer: There is one derived metric that could be useful to track: the total time spent on the UTO's event queue. You can get this by enabling the additional metrics and computing (reconciliations_duration - (internal_op0_duration + internal_op1_duration,...)).

Currently, we only support a single thread polling from the UTO's event queue. This thread works in batch mode, but it could be a bottleneck in the Alice bulk use case, where I expect a big queue backlog even if you increase the batch size.

Author: > There is one derived metric that could be useful to track: the total time spent on the UTO's event queue. You can get this by enabling the additional metrics and computing (reconciliations_duration - (internal_op0_duration + internal_op1_duration,...)).

nice that's a good info to know :)

## 6. Test Environment
- Hardware/Software Requirements:
    - Here I would like you to hear your input about infrastructures which correlates with each use case (i.e., Alice’s, Bob’s and Carol’s). 

>          What do we need here? Is it enough to have 6-node cluster where each node has 16GB RAM and 8 CPU?

Reviewer: The test should be tailored for the hardware we have. The resources you mention seems to be a bit low even for a small real world cluster.

Author: Well so what do you image I could use our continuous infra which has a lot of more power :)) but I need some quantification..

- Configuration Details: Describe the setup of the Kafka cluster and UTO configurations.
    - Also here It would be great to see some examples…
## 7. Test Tools
- List tools used for load testing, monitoring, and analysis (e.g., JMeter or Peper Box for load testing, Prometheus and Grafana for monitoring).

> - I would firstly start with manual testing and then we could see if that’ s okay and start automating them and create some kind of reporting and gathering logs?

Reviewer: In order to have reproducible tests, you need some kind of automatic coordination with warmup and test phases. The test should run end-to-end and possibly recording relevant metrics. 

For my blog post, I created a small Java driver that was running on a separate machine. We can evolve/adapt this to cover more use cases, and maybe contribute back to Strimzi as performance tests. Should we add this as test objective?

https://github.com/fvaleri/examples/blob/main/misc/strimzi-deploy/src/main/java/it/fvaleri/example/TopicOperator.java

Author: Hmmm, so I think maybe forking strimzi STs and adding some performance package would be great to avoid redundancy of setup whole resources...

Reviewer: Yeah, we only need some way to isolate them in a dedicated group.

      * Pay special attention to the latency during the bulk creation and deletion of topics.
        Expected Results:
     * Topics are created, and data is ingested and consumed as expected without significant delays.
     * The system maintains stability and performance throughout the test.
     * Latency for bulk operations (creation and deletion) is within acceptable limits.
     * Resource utilization stays within expected thresholds, indicating no bottlenecks.
       Post-Conditions:
     * All test topics are successfully deleted.
     * System returns to normal operational status.
- **Variations**:
  * Vary the number of topics and the volume of data to test system limits.
  * Adjust batch size and linger time to evaluate their impact on performance.
- **Risks and Mitigation Strategies**:
  * System overload: Monitor resource utilization closely and have fallbacks or thresholds to prevent system crashes.

**Note:** that this table is just filled with random values. We could definitely extract or add some metrics, which we think would be great for our findings.

> | Experiment # | Batch Size | Linger Time (s) | Topics Created | Throughput (msgs/sec) | Latency (ms) | CPU Utilization (%) | Memory Utilization (%) | Experiment Notes           |

Reviewer: We are interested in throughput and latency of topic events, but here an in the following test case 2 looks like we are tracking messages instead. Do we want to track per topic event type?

Author: Yeah this sound like a good approach, we want track per topic event type :)

|--------------|------------|-----------------|----------------|-----------------------|--------------|---------------------|------------------------|---------------------------|

> | 1            | 50         | 30              | 500            | 10,000                | 120          | 70                  | 60                     | Initial setup             |

Reviewer: We should always start with default configuration (bs: 100, lt: 100ms).

### iii) Test Case: Carol’s Development Cluster Scenario for UTO
- **Objective:** To assess the UTO’s performance in a development environment with frequent topic modifications, focusing on minimizing latency and ensuring quick responsiveness to changes.
- **Description:** This test case simulates a development cluster scenario where Carol oversees a Kafka environment used by dozens of application developers. The developers frequently create, modify, and delete topics as part of their development work, requiring the UTO to quickly process these changes with minimal latency.
- **Preconditions:**
  * A Kafka cluster with the UTO deployed, configured to mimic a development environment.
  * Tools and scripts for dynamic topic creation, modification, and deletion.
  * Monitoring tools for tracking performance metrics.
- **Test Steps:**
  * Dynamic Topic Management:
      * Simulate the behavior of application developers by frequently creating, modifying, and deleting topics in the Kafka cluster.
  * High-Frequency Operations:

>       * Ensure that topic operations (create, modify, delete) are performed at a high frequency to replicate a real development environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * Ensure that topic operations (add, update, delete) are performed at a high frequency to replicate a real development environment.
```

      * Pay particular attention to how quickly the UTO responds to frequent changes.
  * Load Testing:
      * Gradually increase the frequency and complexity of topic operations to assess the UTO’s behavior under increasing load.
        Expected Results:
  * The UTO efficiently handles frequent topic operations with minimal latency.
  * The system remains stable and responsive even under high-frequency changes.
  * Latency for processing each operation is within the targeted threshold.
  * Resource utilization does not spike unexpectedly, indicating efficient handling of dynamic changes.
- **Post-Conditions:**
  * The Kafka cluster and UTO return to a stable state with all temporary test topics cleaned up.
    Variations:
  * Vary the rate of topic operations to test the UTO's responsiveness under different load conditions.
  * Experiment with different UTO configurations to find the optimal setup for a development environment.
- **Risks and Mitigation Strategies:**
  * Risk of overloading the system: Implement safeguards and closely monitor system health to prevent crashes or significant slowdowns.

> | Experiment # | Operation Frequency | Linger Time (ms) | Topics Modified | Throughput (ops/sec) | Latency (ms) | CPU Utilization (%) | Memory Utilization (%) | Experiment Notes            |

Reviewer: You need to formally define High, Medium and Very High in terms of events/s, otherwise it is difficult to compare with results.

Author: Done
